Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Carbon Technology Manager,
David Wright.
Welcome everybody.
I just wanted to see how many stayed
because this is the first time this hall
has competition with other sessions.
Alright.
As you can tell,
we are so ready for all of you
to bring your applications to
Mac OS X by carbonizing them.
And this session is the kickoff for that,
so I want to just bring
Scott Forstall up.
He's the Director of
Application Frameworks in
Apple Software Engineering Group.
Please welcome Scott Forstal.
Is everyone ready to learn about Carbon?
No, come on.
Okay, a couple years ago we came up
with this Carbon strategy and we
were incredibly excited about it
and we gave you the direction.
But it was a little bit fuzzy.
The strategy made sense,
and you all told us that.
But some of the details
weren't quite there yet.
We needed to fill in exactly
what were the Carbon APIs.
We certainly needed to
fill in the implementation.
And so last year, we took Carbon and we
brought it into sharp focus.
And no,
I did not name my daughter Carbon.
As tempting as that may have been to me,
it wasn't tempting to my wife.
So last year we really filled
out the details of Carbon.
We gave you a complete Carbon spec.
We gave you a lot of tools
that helped with Carbonization.
We gave you this thing called the
Carbon Dater that you've heard about,
which is an amazing thing.
The tool creates custom
documentation to tell you how you
can Carbonize your application.
So over the last year,
it's been really exciting for me and the
Carbon effort to watch how many of you
have started taking advantage of Carbon.
It's been fabulous.
Every few days, every week,
I see a new Carbon application appear.
But I know that some of you last year,
you looked up and you said,
I like Carbon.
I like the direction,
I like the strategy,
the details make sense,
but it looks a little bit fragile.
You know,
it can't even hold its head up by itself,
right?
And so you waited a little bit.
Well, over the last year,
Carbon has matured a ton.
And Carbon is now ready.
It is not fragile anymore.
And this year, it's time for all of us
and all of you to dig in.
and I've been working all the time
so I have to work in pictures of
her so I know what she looks like.
It's time for you not to
worry about being dirty,
getting your hands dirty,
getting your face dirty.
You've got to dig in.
It's time to really get
started with Carbon.
So let's do that.
At the end of this hour of bliss,
I could pull the junior high
school trick of having a pop quiz,
right?
Telling you to close your books,
put them under the desk,
those frightening words.
And I'd have five simple
questions on this quiz.
And it'd be easy because I'm going
to tell you the answers right now.
So the questions would be, first of all,
What are the user benefits of Carbon?
So when we went and designed Carbon,
we did it with the user in mind.
With a laser, we looked at how can we
better benefit the user?
Next, what exactly is Carbon?
So you've heard about the benefits.
You've heard a lot about Carbon.
But what exactly makes up Carbon?
We want to keep the user happy.
And of course, you're all our friends.
We want to keep you happy as well.
So what are the developer benefits?
How do you build a great
Carbon application?
Not how do you just build
a Carbon application,
but how can you go that step beyond
and get a great Carbon application?
And last, when should you carbonize?
All right, let's dig in.
Two years ago,
when we came up with the Carbon Strategy,
I had this dream.
And to this day,
I still think this dream best
illustrates the user benefits of Carbon.
So I've been thinking a lot
about this dream recently,
and I had it again.
A little updated version.
So sit back and psychoanalyze me
as I tell you my Carbon dream,
or my Mac OS X dream.
So here's how the dream goes.
Apple is throwing this huge party.
It's the Mac OS X party.
And outside this part is a big sign.
And it says, Mac OS X,
all of your apps are invited.
An app started arriving at this party.
Now, the first group to come
are these Cocoa folks.
Because the Cocoa folks,
they're pretty hip to
the whole Mac OS X idea.
They're old friends with Mach.
They came into the party,
and they said they came
in through the 20th floor.
And they're a dynamic bunch.
They're walking around the party.
They're enjoying themselves.
They're throwing messages at each other.
And they're having a good time.
The second group that
came was a little strange.
It was this big cluster,
like a rugby scrum.
And they're all like attached to the
hip and they walked in together and
they couldn't separate from each other.
And it was a bunch of
old friends in there.
I mean, we recognized everyone.
It was all these old friends.
But, you know,
they're sitting there partying and
they're drinking and they're having fun.
And, God, one guy in the middle,
he drinks way too much.
Boom!
Falls in his face.
And the entire group, boom!
Falls in their face.
Turns out,
I just looked at that and I said,
you know, that's classic.
And that's what that was.
That's the classic apps.
They're all these old friends
and they're invited to the party.
But even at the Mac OS X party,
they're no more stable,
they're no more independent
than they were before.
They're all,
they're stuck together at the hips.
The next group that came in,
they came running in,
they came running up to the door
and they ran in and they said,
hey, I'm Java.
And this guy said, hey, I'm Java too.
Hey, I'm Java.
Hey, I'm Java too.
And they ran across
the room and they ran,
they grabbed a beer, you know,
they claimed they were on everywhere.
And the last group to come
were these real hipsters.
And these were the Carbon apps.
They came up and, you know,
they were old friends,
but they looked slightly different.
They were wearing nicer clothes.
Their posture was a little bit better.
They all talked about this little
surgery they'd had a little while ago.
They've been separated
from that other group.
They were still friends with those guys,
but they were separated and
they were individuals and
they weren't tied to others.
And in fact,
there were some real cows in this group,
cash cows.
And these cash cows,
they looked as healthy as possible.
So that's what we're doing with Mac OS X.
We're throwing a party.
And it's the Mac OS X party.
And all of your apps are invited.
But if you have a classic app,
you really want to make it an
individual and break it off
and make it into a Carbon app.
All right, done with psychoanalysis.
What does this mean?
When we looked at building
Carbon in Mac OS X,
there were three main user
benefits that we were shooting for.
First, stability.
We'd like a more stable platform
with more stable applications.
Next, performance and responsiveness.
So we want the whole system
to perform incredibly well.
We want it to be fast.
We want applications to respond to you.
And third, we really want to
improve user experience.
So let's start with stability.
Stability comes in the
form of protected memory.
On Mac OS 9,
there's a single address space.
And all of your applications run
within this single address space.
The weird thing is you sort of run
on the honor system for Mac OS 9,
right?
You promise you're not going to write
over other applications' memory.
Turns out most apps are honorable.
Some in the back aren't.
And when those aren't honorable,
those are the ones that drink too much,
aren't responsible, they fall down,
pull the entire system down.
Now we want those apps to still run on X,
and so what we've done is we've slid
Darwin in underneath the Mac OS system,
and then those apps run in
the classic environment.
But they still run within
a single address space for
all of those applications.
Next we have Carbon applications,
Java and Cocoa.
All of these get their own address space.
So each Carbon application,
Carbon applications are the party,
they're not affected by each other,
they live as individuals and
aren't affected with the memory
space of other applications.
So let's go ahead and demo this for you.
This morning,
Steve in his keynote showed a BOM app.
Can we bring this machine up?
In his BOM app, it was a Carbon BOM app,
and this is an equal application.
And this BOM app,
its whole goal is to write all over
memory and take down other applications.
So he did it as a Carbon application,
and when that Carbon application ran,
it just crashed itself.
What we've done here is
we have a classic BOM app.
So that BOM app is running
in the classic environment,
and when it runs, it's going to try to
write all over memory.
Of course, it's allowed to do that.
This is the drunk of the party.
And he's going to take
down other applications.
Now what you can see is
on the left-hand side,
we have a couple applications,
QuickTime and Text Editor or something.
And they're running as
Carbon applications,
as modern applications.
On the other side, we have two apps that
are classic applications.
Go ahead and light the BOM.
All the classic apps go away.
The Carbon apps, Cocoa apps,
Java apps are still running.
The question is,
where do you want to run your browser?
Where do you want to run your fetch?
Where do you want to
run your applications?
You want to run them on the side
that's not going to go away.
Thanks, Dave.
So the next thing we looked at
is improving the performance and
responsiveness of the system.
So there's a bunch of ways of doing that.
The main thing we get is
with preemptive scheduling.
So what does that mean?
The OS on Mac OS X will preemptively
schedule different tasks,
which means it'll actually choose to
give a little bit of time to one app,
a little bit of time to another,
and it'll be fair about this.
This isn't like Lord of the Flies
where you have to have the conch
to speak and you have to give
it up to let someone else speak.
The OS steals the conch and
gives it to the next person.
So it allows things to preemptively
schedule against each other.
What that means is if one task
is taking a ton of CPU and
it's just trying to hog it,
it doesn't matter.
The OS will still give
other tasks some time,
so the user interface will be more live.
One application can't stop another
application's UI from responding.
Now it turns out this
also improves stability.
Why is that?
Well if you get a
ill-behaved application,
which just starts spinning
and spinning and spinning,
On Mac OS 9 right now,
that could hang the whole system, right?
The system feels like it's hung
because that application isn't
giving up time to anything else.
On Mac OS X, the OS will still time slice
between it and other applications.
So other applications will
still get time to do stuff.
We also with Carbon wanted to make
the entire system PowerPC native.
So we took anything that was 68K,
we rewrote it,
and everything now is PowerPC native.
So last, we really wanted to improve
the user experience.
We really wanted to rededicate
ourselves to creating a
world-class user experience.
And I'm not just saying-- I'm
saying user experience because
we care about the user interface,
right?
We care about the elegance and
the cleanliness and the imagery,
but we also care about the behaviors.
What does it feel like
to use this whole system?
So the first thing we did is we
improved stability and performance.
If your system stays up longer,
if your applications don't crash,
then you have a better user experience.
We could have stopped there.
Next, we got rid of fixed size heaps.
So virtual memory is always on.
Now what does that mean?
You know this panel?
Who loves this panel?
Okay, who wants this panel to die?
Alright.
Dead.
You never again have to explain to
someone in your user documentation
Go to the app, not the link,
go to the application, do get info on it,
go to the memory part of that,
and then set a number which makes sense.
What makes sense for a user on
how much memory they should use?
They have, say, 64 meg of RAM.
They want to use 64 meg of RAM.
They have a gig,
which is all you guys I know.
You want to use a gig.
This hit home for me this weekend when
I was working on this presentation.
I kept on getting this
panel over and over.
PowerPoint was telling me
there's not enough memory.
There's not enough memory.
And so I'd increase the partition.
And then it would work fine for a while.
And then I'd add some
images of my daughter.
And then suddenly it was telling
me there's not enough memory again.
Again.
Gone.
So the last way we want to
improve the user experience is,
of course, with Aqua.
So let's talk through that.
When the Mac was born years ago-- and no,
I didn't name my daughter Mac either.
It was an incredibly fresh face, right?
The user experience,
the user interface was great,
and everyone really liked it.
And as the Mac has aged,
it's remained a great user interface,
but we looked at it recently and we said,
"As good as the user interface is,
it's extremely hip still,
but it's slightly dated maybe." You know,
hip, but dated.
Now don't get me wrong,
it's still light years
ahead of the competition.
[Transcript missing]
So we thought we could do better.
And I believe with Aqua, we really have.
The amount of polish and attention to
detail and elegance in Aqua is extreme.
Now, as I said before,
you can still run your classic
apps on top of Mac OS X.
But your classic apps do
not get the Aqua interface.
So they're going to look slightly old.
They'll play within the same system,
but they're going to have
the Platinum controls.
So your users will know whether
or not you've gone to the
work to give them a stable,
polished Aqua app,
or you're just relying on
the classic experience.
Alright, so those are the user benefits
that we are striving for.
Now what exactly is Carbon?
So when we looked at the Mac OS,
there's a whole set of APIs,
this large set that makes up,
that defines the Mac OS.
A lot of these APIs are great,
and it's what you depend
on for your applications.
And we really wanted
to move those forward.
Our goal isn't to force you to
rewrite your entire application.
In fact, our goal was quite the opposite.
But some of these APIs prevent progress.
So when we looked at these APIs,
we said we can really split it,
in marketing terms,
into the good and the bad.
And the bad APIs are the
ones that prevent protection.
So for instance, low memory globals.
Everyone writes wildly
to low memory globals.
You can't do that in a
protected memory environment.
So we had to get rid of those.
Anything that prevented preemption,
we had to get rid of.
And any 68K specific APIs.
So Trap Manager, Segment Manager,
anything that was 68K specific,
we had to remove as part of the bad APIs.
So Carbon is the good
APIs from the Mac OS.
Carbon is a living entity.
Carbon is growing.
Carbon is not freeze-dried
at some point in time,
but we're adding on to it.
So for instance, we added on Aqua.
So as we add APIs, Carbon over time will
grow to encompass those.
Carbon is our vehicle
for adding those APIs.
So where does your app fit in here?
Well, we've done a ton of measurements.
We built all these tools.
We built a lot of databases.
And we ran application after application
after application through here,
thousands of applications.
And what we found is an
application is typically about 95%
Carbon compliant or Carbon ready.
What that means is 95% of the APIs you're
calling are fully Carbon supported.
So there's no change for those.
But there is a subset, 5% of the APIs,
that are calling into globals,
that are calling into data
structures that we've hidden now.
And for those,
you have to do a little bit of
work to move your application
to be 100% Carbon compliant.
And when you do that,
then you'll have a full
Carbon application.
We didn't go crazy here, right?
We didn't change the application model.
We're not telling you you
have to start from scratch and
rewrite your entire application.
We didn't go create an
object-oriented Java API set.
If you want a great
object-oriented Java API set,
go to Cocoa.
Go to Java 2.
There are Java APIs on the platform.
What we wanted to do here was take
all the work you've invested in the
Mac OS APIs and move it forward.
Let's be honest here, right?
We're not automatic.
So you do have to do work
to get a Carbon application.
You have to recompile.
It's not binary compatible.
If you want it to be binary compatible,
run it in Classic, but you don't get the
advantages of Mac OS X.
All right, so the user's happy.
Now you know what Carbon is.
Why are you going to be happy?
So there's a bunch of developer benefits
that we've added into Carbon as well.
First, we want to make sure that you can
truly move onto Carbon without
giving up the installed base.
So we want you to be able
to sell into both 9 and 10.
I know that most of you are lazy.
Most of you work 168 hours a week,
and we'd like you to work 80.
So we want to do most
of the work for you.
We want,
when you're carbonizing an application,
when you're moving an
application forward,
that you do the work that's
specific to your application,
not the system's work.
We'll do all the rest.
We really wanted to design this
with future enhancements in mind.
Carbon is a living entity.
We want to advance it.
And it turns out that
developing a Carbon will
enhance developer productivity.
Let's talk through these.
So first, where do you want to
run your application?
So you have a Carbon application,
and there's two main
platforms you care about.
And here I've listed Mac OS 9
to generically mean Mac OS 8,
1, 8, 6, Mac OS 8 and 9,
and then Mac OS X.
So it's obvious that you'll be able
to ship your Carbon application
on Mac OS X because Carbon is
an intrinsic piece of Mac OS X.
One of the main points of Mac OS X was
to provide Carbon support.
So boom, your application, Mac OS X,
sits right there.
Now Mac OS 9 has a lot of the
APIs that are part of Carbon,
but it doesn't have all of them.
So what we've done is
provided this thin layer,
this thin veneer,
which is called CarbonLib,
or the Carbon Library.
The Carbon Library, for most APIs,
just calls directly into Mac OS 9
because the API is there.
But where we've added on APIs that
are part of Carbon but weren't part of
Mac OS 9 or weren't part of Mac OS 8.6,
those APIs are implemented in
and part of the Carbon Library.
So on Mac OS 9, your application runs on
top of the Carbon Library.
So next is,
we know you have a lot of code
that's based on the Mac OS APIs.
What we wanted to do with Carbon is to
preserve your investment in these APIs,
make it easy for you to take
advantage of new features,
and quickly get on Carbon.
And we think we've done that.
In fact, we've asked a lot of you,
you know, how hard do you think
it's been to carbonize,
those of you who have worked on it.
And consistently I've heard
that it's about the same work
as moving from 68K to PowerPC.
For some of you who have
really well-written code,
it's a lot easier, just moved right over.
For those of you who have a
lot of skeletons in the closet,
a lot of cruft in your applications,
it's a little bit harder.
So the next thing we want
to do with Carbon is design
it for future enhancements.
So as I said,
Carbon is this living and growing thing.
And in the future,
we'd love to do more things with it.
We'd love to make it so
the toolbox is reentrant,
so add more threading support.
We'd also love to advance
and improve features.
I'm sure this hasn't
happened to any of you,
but I've heard before when a new
version of Mac OS has come out,
sometimes some people's applications
are doing something they shouldn't have,
and the OS breaks them.
A lot of that is because our
data structures are all open.
And you guys love to get in there
and dig and do funny things,
right?
You learned that this one data structure,
if you twiddle the third
bit of the second field,
then, you know,
windows stay on top or something.
Instead of allowing you to manipulate
these things in sort of a random
manner with these open data structures,
in fact,
we have to hide those data structures
if we want to make something reentrant
because we can't count on when
you're going to touch that data
structure if we can't actually put
a lock around it in another thread.
So because of that,
we've made most of the
data structures opaque,
right?
So you can't get directly
at the data structures.
Instead, we've added accessors,
so semantic accessors that'll get exactly
the information you're looking for.
And then actually,
it turns out your code reads a
lot better because instead of just
changing some part of some structure,
you're actually calling a function
that tells you what your purpose
was with the toolbox at that point.
So we're really designing... We're
designing this so when we come out with
future versions of Mac OS X and Carbon,
we can advance the back end.
We can advance our implementation,
and you'll get the advantage
without it affecting,
without it damaging your application.
So developer productivity.
Who here wouldn't want to make
your application easier to develop?
What we found is when people
come to Mac OS X and to Carbon,
they're finding it easier to develop
the application and a little bit faster.
So why is this?
Well, first, you don't crash the machine
when you're debugging it.
I've worked on code before
where you're debugging it and
you take down the whole system.
Code I inherited, not mine.
And on Mac OS X, that doesn't happen,
right?
You just take down the
application you're writing,
the one you're developing.
You don't take down the whole system.
So the debug, find something, fix it,
and then go to the next
bug cycle is much faster.
It also helps you to find your bugs on X.
So you know those trickiest to
find bugs are the memory smashers,
right?
It's the random little memory
smasher where you wrote off to
some random place in memory and
then five minutes later the system
starts behaving somewhat strangely.
And you have no idea why because when
you wrote into that memory space and
when your system or your application
or system crashed aren't immediate,
right?
There's no causal
connection that you can see.
So what we, on Mac OS X,
if you write someplace random,
your app crashes immediately.
You get a back trace, you find out, hey,
I can't write to that segment.
That's outside of my memory space.
You can't write to null.
And we've actually had a lot of
developers who have told us that they
couldn't find some bug and then they
pulled it over on Carbon and within
five minutes they'd found the bug.
It actually turns out that when we were
Carbonizing some of our toolbox code,
we found some memory smashers that
were on 9 that we didn't know about.
So there's no more bugs
in the toolbox on 9.
So that's the developer benefits.
Now how do you build a
great Carbon application?
Our goal here is not for you just
to build a Carbon application,
but really to build the
best one you possibly can.
The reason most of you are here and can
afford to attend a conference and spend
time and are getting paid isn't because
you built some Mac OS application,
just an arbitrary Mac OS application.
It's because you built a best
of breed Mac OS application.
You went above and beyond and
you built something so good that
it's better than the competition.
So when you look at Carbon,
you should think about it the same way.
You shouldn't shoot just to
build some Carbon application,
but you should figure out how
can you build the best possible
Carbon application you can.
So let's talk about that.
I'm going to go through a
hypothetical application here.
So this is not a real application,
but just so we can talk about
the carbonization process.
So I got this group of people and they
had read Kafka's The Metamorphosis.
And so they wrote an
application called iMetamorph.
And iMetamorph takes and it
morphs one image into another,
the same way that in Kafka's book
a man turned into a bug overnight.
So here's this application,
and here's an example.
You take a dirty kid,
and you magically clean them up.
So that's our slogan for Carbon, right?
We clean you up.
So this application that takes and does
this processing has a lot of things it
needs to deal with when going to Carbon.
So what are those things?
Well, first of all,
This company has a whole lot of code,
right?
They have lots and lots of
different pieces of code,
and they have to determine, well,
what should they carbonize, right?
What should this Kafka Enterprises,
this company, what should they carbonize?
They have applications and
nits and plug-ins and device
drivers and all sorts of things.
So first they need to determine
what pieces of code are
candidates for carbonization.
So first of all,
the answer is applications.
Applications are absolutely
candidates for carbonization.
You should carbonize your applications,
foreground and background.
So if you have a faceless
background application,
absolutely you should
carbonize that as well.
You should also carbonize plug-ins.
Now there's two pieces of
technology on the system that
can really aid in this process.
There's a technology called
Core Foundation and it sits pretty
low in the architectural stack.
And Core Foundation has something
called CFBundle and CF Plug-in
and both of these will aid in your
carbonization process of plug-ins,
so you should check those out.
Now they shouldn't
carbonize device drivers.
By their very nature,
a device driver is an
OS specific piece of code.
It's dealing with the OS and
how the OS deals with devices.
So instead of carbonizing those,
they should continue on Mac OS 9
to do the same thing they were
before with Device Manager.
And on Mac OS X,
you should look at I/O Kit and
write an I/O Kit driver,
which will provide the
functionality you want on X.
And lastly, they shouldn't carbonize
their system in nits.
So it turns out,
in its work counter to the
goal of increased stability.
Now there are some in it which
by their nature are really just
faceless background applications.
And so those should
actually be carbonized.
Those should become Carbon applications
and run as faceless background,
you know, servers.
But they shouldn't be carbonized as,
you know,
something which patches the whole system.
All right.
So how do you carbonize?
What's the process?
So it turns out it's really simple.
First, since we've taken and made all
these data structures opaque,
You have to go to work
to adopt the accessors.
And this is probably the bulk of your
work carbonizing your application.
And the great part of it is,
it's the easiest part of carbonizing.
It's really a grunge work, mundane,
sit in your office from 1 p.m.
when you get into work until, you know,
6 a.m.
the next day for a couple days.
And you just walk
through compiler errors.
That's all it is.
Because the compiler is going to
tell you if you're accessing a data
structure which isn't there anymore.
So the first part is go ahead and
adopt all the new accessor functions.
The next thing is to use
the new toolbox UPPs.
So what is this?
We used to have generic functions
for creating UPPs for callbacks.
Now we have more type safe UPPs which are
created per callback that you care about.
So you have to go ahead and
instead of using the generic ones,
use the more specific ones now.
If your application opens or saves files,
you want to use Nav Services.
So go ahead and adopt
the Nav Services APIs.
And Apple Help is now the way to
provide help for your application.
Okay, so you do these four simple things.
That's it.
Right?
We're done.
So I'm wasting your time here.
You could have done that
while I was talking.
There's two really good talks that can
teach you more about how to carbonize.
The first one is really
transitioning your application,
so what is the carbonization process.
That one will go through more of
the exact steps you need to take,
a lot more of the process,
and I encourage you to go to that one.
And then, of course,
the navigation services talk,
which will tell you about
how to use Nav Services.
But that's not it, right?
You can do more.
And you really do.
You really want to create the
best of breed Carbon application.
Because I don't know about you,
but when I watch some of the demos
that are coming out on Carbon,
I get pretty excited because
I'm not writing an application
in the same field they are.
I mean, they're looking great.
Okay, so what should you do?
Well, if you look at...
If you look at this iMetamorph
application I talked about,
they do this big operation where
they take an image and then they
morph it into another image.
So there's a lot of computation
that goes on in that.
It takes a while.
So what they were doing before is
they were using Thread Manager,
right?
So they'd take, and when you said start
morphing these images,
it would take and it would throw
this into a Thread Manager thread
so you could continue working with
the UI and changing other things.
Now it turns out that Thread
Manager is cooperatively scheduled.
So what that means is--
As a thread's doing work,
it is a separate thread,
but every once in a while it has to say,
okay, I'm going to take a break, right?
Coffee break now, stop,
someone else goes ahead, does some work,
they come back, they take a coffee break,
you get to work.
And you go back and forth,
and only one's working at a time,
but it's up to them to decide when
the other thread gets time to work.
So, the problem with that is,
if you're working on this application,
and this other thread's
doing a lot of computation,
if it decides not to give you time,
then your UI feels a little stale.
It freezes for a little bit,
it's jittery,
it isn't the smooth experience
that you really want to have
in a Carbon application on X.
Now, by the very nature of
the Thread Manager APIs,
on X we can't make them preemptively
scheduled because you assume,
based on the semantics of the APIs,
that it will be cooperatively scheduled.
Now, what we've done on X is, of course,
there are the multiprocessing APIs,
which we have on 9 as well.
The MP APIs, the multiprocessing APIs,
on X are preemptively
scheduled against each other.
So, the OS itself will go between
the threads and time slice
so no one gets starved out.
So this iMetamorph application,
instead of sitting on Thread Manager and
doing cooperative scheduling,
it should go ahead and move to the
MP APIs and do preemptive scheduling.
Now the way we've implemented the
MP APIs is on top of Pthreads.
Pthreads are the POSIX threads.
And if you wanted to,
you could go straight to POSIX threads
and use the POSIX threads directly.
The MP APIs is just a thin layer for an
API you may know that uses the Pthreads.
All right.
So there's a session where you can learn
a lot more about the threading and also
shared memory and file systems and all
the lower architectural levels of Carbon.
Now each year at this conference,
we get feedback forms from you.
And you tell us you want
five full days of conference.
You say, don't cheat us out.
Don't give us four and a half days.
We want five days.
So our schedulers this year
have outdone themselves.
by taking one of the more important
sessions and scheduling it in this room,
which I'm sure will be
packed at 5:00 PM on Friday,
ending at 6:30.
So I expect it to be packed.
All right,
the next technology you should really
take advantage of is Carbon Events.
So Carbon Events is a way of
sending user actions and other
events throughout your application.
So Carbon Events does a
lot of things for you.
It really improves your application.
The first thing it'll do
is improve performance.
So that said,
you should go and take advantage of it,
because we want to have applications
running as fast as possible on Mac OS X.
So the way it does this is it sends
events only when they're necessary.
It means you don't have to sit
there and pull constantly to
see the state of something.
So what does that mean?
So a year ago, when my wife and I were
due with this baby-- well,
when my wife was due with the
baby and I was doing nothing--
The grandparents started calling,
and they started calling once a week.
And then they started calling once a day.
And they started calling
multiple times a day.
And they were saying, you know,
how long have you been born yet?
How long have you been born yet?
You know, they're constantly,
constantly pulling us
over and over again.
And at some point I said, you know,
stop calling.
I promise I will, you know,
send you a Carbon event.
Well, I mean, not that geeky.
I said, you know, I'll call you.
I promise I'll call you when she's born,
right?
I will send you an event.
I will call you.
There's no reason for
you to constantly pull.
Pulling was not only, you know,
somewhat irritating,
it tied up the phone lines.
The phone was busy all the time.
The same thing happens right now
on Mac OS 9 when you start saying,
where's the mouse?
Where's the mouse?
And the mouse, you know,
the cursor's just sitting there, right?
You know, where's the mouse?
It's sitting there.
It hasn't moved at all.
And you're tying up the whole
CPU asking a question which doesn't
change each time you ask it.
So what Carbon Events does
is you sit back and you say,
hey, mouse, just like that, hey, mouse,
tell me when you move.
And so then when the mouse moves,
it'll tell you it's moved
to another position.
You don't need to tie up the CPU.
by polling and asking it where it is.
The next thing Carbon Events does
is it'll simplify and reduce
code in your application.
So instead of you having to have a
lot of code when an action comes in
to figure out where it was meant for,
to figure out how do
you direct it somewhere,
the Carbon Events themselves
will figure out who the event was
meant for and direct it there.
So it really simplifies your application.
Carbon events also allow you
to customize toolbox behaviors.
So again, generic patching was too
large a mechanism to do some
of what it wanted to do,
right?
It was this huge hammer where you had to,
you know, patch an entire thing just
to change a minor behavior.
And in some cases,
it worked against our goals of stability.
So what we've done with Carbon events
is we've provided a nice mechanism
where you can intercept events,
you can change them slightly.
There's a lot more specific APIs meant
for you to modify behaviors instead
of patching an entire subsystem.
So there's a couple talks tomorrow about
this and I really encourage you to go and
learn all you can about Carbon Events.
Now there's a lot more talks
than what I'm pointing out.
I'm just pointing out some of
the highlights that I think
you may or should attend.
The entire conference is full of great
Carbon talks that you should attend.
All right.
What does an application look like?
How do we package an application?
You've built a Carbon application.
Instead of packaging how you have today,
is there a way we can make it
so it's better for the user?
Can we make it multilingual?
We of course want it to run
in both Mac OS 9 and 10.
And let's make it very,
very simple for the user.
Again, we want to encourage simplicity.
So multilingual.
We've certainly found that we make
a lot of money by taking exactly
the software we've written and just
selling it in a different language,
right?
Localizing it to another
language and selling it.
Most of the work you do is
to create your application.
It's not to do the
language specific part.
So what we want is to support
multiple localizations for an
application extremely well.
Of course,
the way to get to there is Unicode,
the standard for multi-language text.
And we have several things in the
system that will help with that.
One is CFString,
so a technology also in Core Foundation,
which deals with Unicode strings.
We also have the
Multilingual Text Editor,
so a Carbon text editor
that deals with Unicode.
And we really want to support single
binary multiple localizations.
What this means is you can
have a single application,
and that application, when run,
will run in the language
of the user's preference.
So that means when
I launch an application,
it'll run in English.
When my boss,
who gave the last talk here,
runs an application, it runs in French.
So the goal is to have a single
application that different people
in the same office can run,
and it runs in the
language of their choice.
So next, of course,
you want your application to be
able to run on Mac OS 9 and 10.
We want to have a single package,
which itself, one SKU,
you can have one box and one SKU,
and that itself will run
in multiple localizations.
And last is simplicity.
See,
this is what iMetamorph started-- looked
like when it started years and years ago,
right?
Real simple.
Single icon in a single folder.
There's no question.
Where's the application?
I look at it now.
And it's full of so much stuff, right?
There's libraries, there's help files and
plug-ins and everything.
And when I look at this folder,
I just see a bunch of trees.
You know, I can't see the forest.
I can't find out where's the
application I'm looking to click,
the application I want to run.
So that's not what we want.
We want something very simple.
So we've solved all
three of those problems,
making something multilingual,
allowing it to run on Mac OS 9 and 10, 8,
9, and 10, and making it very simple with
something called application packages.
So application packages is where we
take an application is represented
by a single item in the finder.
Right?
So it's that one clickable thing.
Now behind that single item
is an entire folder hierarchy.
So there's lots of stuff in there.
There's files and data
and all sorts of things.
But to the user, it's a single item,
right?
Very, very simple.
And we have technology called
CFBundle which helps to retrieve
this data and the resources.
Now here's the way I think of CFBundle.
CFBundle is your high-end
shoe salesperson.
Now what does that mean?
You know when you go and
you're shopping for shoes,
and you go into a high-end store,
not someplace where you walk in and
there's boxes of shoes all over the place
and you have to find your own shoes.
But you go into a
really fancy shoe place,
and you sit down,
and you point out and you say,
I like that shoe in that
size and in this color.
and this very friendly person
walks back behind this door.
And you have no idea what
they do behind that door,
right?
You don't know where they go to look.
They have some structure back there where
they have racks and racks of shoes maybe.
They have some way of knowing
where to look for the right shoe.
But they go and they find that
right shoe and they bring it out
and they put it on your foot.
So CFBundle does the same
thing for you except,
you know, put the resource on your foot.
You ask CFBundle,
I'd like this resource in this language.
And CFBundle goes back behind
this folder hierarchy and it finds
that resource in that language
and it brings it back to you.
That whole folder structure could
be reorganized and you don't care
because CFBundle knows how to find it.
Now sometimes, you know,
the shoe sales person
might come back and say,
"We don't have it in that color,
but we have it in another color."
CFBundle can do the same thing.
It might come back and say,
"I don't have it in
French," and you can say,
"I'd like it in English," and it'll
go back and find it and bring it back.
So CFBundle will help find
all these resources for you.
All right.
So application packaging really
allows us to have this very
simple but very powerful way of--
Compacting and putting
an application together.
But you know what?
That's a really ugly icon.
And people do judge an app
a little bit by the icon.
You want a really nice icon, right?
It's the face of your application
when it's not running.
And when it is,
it's the face in the dock.
So we really want to encourage you,
and Carbon and Mac OS X supports
and encourages you to work on
your applications and build
really great applications.
So what you should do
is use 32-bit color.
Use transparency and
anti-alias your icon.
And also, make sure your icon looks
really good from small sizes,
16 by 16, all the way up to 128 by 128.
Because if the docket's really big,
it's 128 by 128 per icon,
and you want your icon to look great.
So spend some time making great icons.
So there's a talk on Thursday to
go over exactly how do you get
those icons into your application.
All right, Aqua.
The simple adoption of Aqua is very,
very simple, right?
We've retained the platinum metrics,
which you requested, and we said, great,
we can do that.
So it's really not very hard for
you to adopt the basics of Aqua,
but you don't want to have an
application which just adopts the basics.
You want to have a great
Carbon application,
which has a great Aqua interface.
So some behaviors, like sheets,
will take a little bit
more time to adopt,
but you should take
that step to adopt them.
You should make sure that your
menu layout abides by the new
Carbon menu layout guidelines.
And you should be ready for the
windows in your applications to be
intermixed with other applications.
In fact,
this is a perfect time for you to
really polish your application.
As we come out with Aqua and Mac OS X,
there's going to be a lot
of emphasis by our users
and by reviewers on user interface,
right?
We're concentrating on it.
And so it's a great time for you
to really do a one over on your
application and make it look great.
So there's a couple talks,
there's actually more,
but here's two of the more important
talks on Aqua that you should attend.
Right after this,
there will be an overview,
and then on Wednesday you can learn
exactly how do you implement it.
Okay,
so how do you build your application?
How do you build your UI, right?
Inside you're going to do
a great Aqua interface.
How do you build this?
We've provided a tool called Interface
Builder which will help you build this.
Interface Builder is a WYSIWYG UI builder
so you visually build and you
visually edit your user interface.
It'll actually import your current
resource manager resources,
so your diddles and the like,
and turn those into an
XML representation which it uses.
The great thing about
that is XML uses Unicode,
so you can actually have a tool process
which will localize your application
just by editing these XML text files.
So this is great.
Interface Builder will help
with the Aqua guidelines.
So it'll help you lay out
your application correctly.
And it also--
has a great concept of how
Carbon Events should work and
really builds that right into
the Interface Builder tool.
So it'll help you to take
advantage of Carbon Events and
really speed up the process of
using Carbon Events in your app.
This is a great talk on Thursday.
You should attend to learn about that.
All right.
So you know what Carbon is,
you're ready to do it,
and the question is, you know,
exactly when do you do it?
So the iMetamorph guys
They were looking at
two different scenarios.
The first one was,
let's come out with one
more version of Mac OS 9.
So one more iMetamorph on Mac OS 9.
Take the next three,
four months to do it.
And then come out with
a version on Mac OS X.
Then come out with the Carbon version,
which of course would go on 9 and 10.
The second scenario is to say
let's go straight for Mac OS X.
Let's go straight for Carbon,
and we're going to get
Mac OS 9 for free as well.
Now if you look at this,
The top one certainly
gets you an app sooner,
but the bottom one gets
you the app sooner on 10.
And never underestimate the
value of being somewhere first.
I think about it this way.
This fraternity brother of
mine back in grad school,
He saw this new platform,
sort of like Mac OS X.
and he thought it was a great thing.
And he started building
some apps for this.
He built this one pretty good app.
And he and a friend,
they worked on this app.
They started adding content to this app.
And he thought it was great.
At some point,
he dropped out of grad school
to start a little company.
[Transcript missing]
So the platform, of course, is the web.
And the application, the company,
is Yahoo.
So by being first,
it wasn't necessarily the
case that Yahoo was the best,
but it was the place everyone went when
they went to the web to find information.
The same thing will be true
with Mac OS X and Carbon.
If your app is first to Carbon,
it'll be the app of a given genre,
of a given breed, of a given type,
that is the Aqua version,
which is the Carbon version
of that application.
And that's the one people
are going to be looking for.
So what I'd really like to do is
challenge all of you to two things.
I challenge you to be beta with us.
So you saw, you know,
Steve said this morning,
we're going to have a beta this summer.
And I challenge you to come out with a
beta of your application at the same time
that we come out with a beta of Mac OS X.
Because then our beta testers
will be testing your beta as well,
right?
It's the best way to get the most
people testing it as early as possible.
Secondly,
I challenge you to be GM with us.
So when we ship our final version,
you ship your final
version at the same time.
And then people will see that is the app,
the Carbon app of that
type for that application.
So on Thursday, there's a talk about
Carbon on Mac OS 9 and 8.
All right.
So I've talked a lot about what
the carbonization process was like.
What I'd like to do now is bring
up some third party developers,
some of you,
to talk about the experience you guys
had with Carbon and how far you've come.
So I'd like to bring up John Wallace to
talk about Now Up to Date.
John?
Great.
Thank you very much.
All right,
I'm John Wallace from Power On Software,
and this is Bill Parr.
I think Apple brought us up here to talk
about this really for a couple reasons,
one of which is being a
Mac software developer.
I'm admittedly one of the
larger Mac software developers,
but from Ohio.
I mean, I think if an Ohio software
developer can do this,
then all of you folks can.
And also because now today in contact
are a pretty popular calendar and
contact manager for Macintosh.
They've been around for a while and
they're quite a challenge for us when
we first looked into it and it got
easier and easier as we went along.
Let's talk about the products.
Now today in contact,
almost three quarters of a million
lines of C and Pascal code.
Let's also take a look at time frames.
That's a lot of code.
But what we did was we first started
carbonizing our now up to date product,
which we're going to show here today.
And we carbonized now up to date.
It first started off as being Pascal.
We went through a week of a
Carbon kitchen and got it along.
And I would say that by
the end of two weeks,
we were 90% of the way done
with the carbonization process.
We also realized the
tools were better in C,
so we converted the
product from Pascal to C,
about 300,000 lines of code.
So what we're going to see right
now is a product that's going
to be a little bit more complex.
So what we're going to see right now is
a product that's undergone about two plus
weeks of carbonization and probably about
two weeks of conversion from Pascal to C.
Let's go take a look at it.
What we've got is we've got the
Caliber and Contact Manager up.
It's all running under Mac OS X.
We're able to make use of some of the
things that are going on in Mac OS X.
For example,
if you take a look at being able to
do Aqua-style banners and so forth,
not too hard for us to take advantage
of all the appearance things.
We haven't yet gone through the process
of actually building on all of the new
buttons and the rest of the appearance,
but just getting up and running
took us about two weeks.
So what do we learn from all this?
I would have to assume that most of you
are in the same boat that we were in.
We didn't know what to really expect,
at least I didn't.
Bill, we were lucky,
Bill had done about 500,000
lines of carbonization before
he came to Power On software,
and this product was brand new to him.
What we found was number one,
there will be a couple
weeks of just grunt work.
You've got to go through and
you've got to modernize everything.
You've got to use the accessor
functions rather than getting directly
into a member variable off of a
port like the port.portbits.bounds.
You have to go through an accessor
function to get through that.
So that's number one.
Number two is it was a great opportunity
for us to modernize our code.
There are a lot of things that
we didn't do because there
were multiple ways to do it.
Do we use Mac TCP?
Not anymore.
Now it's all OT.
And those kind of things,
because of Carbon,
it kind of put us in a position
where we're now modernizing and
making our software really aligned
more with where Apple was going.
I guess the third message that we got
from all this was that this is real.
Last year we had the promise
of Carbon and the promise
that it would be easy.
It is easy.
And we had the promise that
it was going to be complete.
It is complete.
And also from everything
we're seeing this week,
it's the future.
So I would highly recommend
everyone out there,
first thing you do if you
want an action step when you
get back from the conference,
go home and carbonize.
It's not that tough.
Within a few weeks,
your app will be up most of the way.
And I think you'll be up for the future.
So I'd like to say really
a big thanks for Apple.
because I think it's great.
Thanks a lot.
Thank you.
One of the funnest things
of my job is every few days,
as I said, I get to see brand new
apps coming to Mac OS X.
And over the last year, for me,
living on it has just
felt more and more real.
So now I'd like to bring
up Mike Garcia from Quark
to go through QuarkXPress.
Okay, I brought a few notes because
I'm not as polished a speaker as
some of the other guys up here.
When I first thought about what
I was going to talk about up here,
I thought about what would I ask?
And I would ask somebody,
how difficult is it
to carbonize your app?
And really, the answer to that question
depends upon your app.
How much code do you have
that is non-standard,
non-recommended?
As you know, Express has been around
for quite a long time.
We run out of one source code base
for all of our different versions,
one byte, two byte, Mac, Windows.
And we have some non-standard things
there because we were doing things on
OS 7 and 8 for efficiency purposes.
We were mucking with fields that we
really shouldn't have been mucking with.
And now we can't because of opacity.
Thank you.
The next thing you need to look at when
you're carbonizing are what are the
specific issues for your application.
For Express,
we have some specific issues.
We need to run Express on OS 8,
so that presents somewhat of a
problem because we need to support
all of our old 4.0 extensions on 8.
And if we're going to support
all of our old extensions,
we have to support our API on 8.
And if you've used our API,
you know we've got a lot
of working directories,
we expose the QD globals.
There are some things that we do there
that we just cannot do with Carbon.
And so we had to branch our code for
4.0 extensions versus Carbon extensions.
The basic changes aren't that difficult.
Opacity, it's a lot of monkey work,
grunt work.
That's what we call it.
It took about two months for
one engineer to do opacity on
Express because it's so huge.
It's over two million lines of code,
about 20 libraries,
and that's not including extensions.
So there's a lot of work
for us to do with opacity.
And you just, like they said,
you go in in the morning and
you start it and you do it.
There are some other issues that you
will probably hit depending on your app.
For us, some of those issues examples
are working directories.
We use working directories
all over the place and we give
them to extension developers.
So we have to remove that because that's
no longer valid on Carbon and that
presents a problem for our interface.
We were doing things with the Viz
region and clipping region for
efficiency purposes where we draw.
We can't do that anymore.
You can't just go into
the window pointer,
graph pointer and mess
with the fields in there.
There are a few other areas where
we just did stuff like that,
and you can't do that anymore.
That's one of the great things about
OS X is it allows us to go in and clean
up some stuff that we really shouldn't
have been doing in the first place.
Let me go ahead and show
you Express running on X.
As you can see,
we're using Navigation Services here.
And here's a great little document.
I'll show the alien that
we do to delete a box.
It's one of our Easter eggs.
And it's gone.
So there we go.
And that kind of illustrates,
leads us into some of
the great side effects,
great benefits that we get from 10.
With that piece of code there, we can,
and displaying the document,
we're able to turn off a
lot of excess code we had to
deal with double buffering.
OS X does it for us now.
We don't have to have this huge
chunk of code that does it.
Other great side effects,
we've been able to re-architect pieces
of code that we've wanted to do,
couldn't validate it
to product management,
and now we have to.
We can go ahead, dig in,
and let's redo this
The last thing I want to say really
is that going over to OS X has been
really fulfilling and gratifying
and it's really cool stuff.
When you start seeing your app go,
it's a lot of fun.
The guys at Apple have
been great in helping us.
The engineers are very helpful.
They'll do whatever you ask them to do.
They'll try and implement it for
you or teach you how to do it.
It's been great.
I suggest you all start it
now because it really is fun.
Thanks a lot, Mike.
All right, last I'd like to bring
up Scott Thompson from
Macromedia to show us Freehand.
These lights are so bright.
It's really great for me to be here.
You have no idea the
carbonization of Freehand has
been somewhat of a long process.
Apple actually asked us to
carbonize Freehand back in
1998 for the original WWDC.
We were trying to have it
in for the Thursday keynote.
We missed it by about two hours.
So I've actually carbonized the Freehand
code base three times since then,
believe it or not.
I did it for eight and
I did it for nine twice.
So I've had a lot of
experience with this.
This time, luckily,
I had the help of a great partner,
Kent Sorenson,
who's over here taking photos.
Helped me out a lot.
So for us,
carbonization was -- and I realize
I'm going to sound a lot like a
broken record because a lot of
the stuff the guys do and a lot
of the stuff the guys have already
said is perfectly up for Freehand,
as it will be for your
applications as well.
But for us, carbonization was largely
a matter of modernization.
Steve said in his keynote that you
had to go through your application
and clean out all the crud.
Freehand, like Quark,
is one of these applications
that's very big.
Ours is 1.2 million lines of code.
And we had lots of stuff that
was left over from System 6,
creating our own GWorlds by hand,
those sorts of things.
Going through the carbonization
process really did let us clean up.
Clean out a lot of the
crud and get going.
We did have the big buildup at the
front where we had to go through and
deal with the opaque data structures.
Like they've said,
it's a matter of sitting down,
sitting down with a compiler,
working through 1,000, 2,000,
3,000 compilers,
getting them all squared away.
But once you've got that done,
you can get a few link
errors maybe here and there.
And then you'll be running up on 9.
Running on 9 was a great first step.
Then we started trying to
play with running on 10.
Running on 10, we had a few crashes.
We got to find some of
our write-to-nil bugs.
Those are there.
Those sorts of things.
But once you work through a
couple of small crashing bugs,
we got a whole lot of functionality.
A really big part of our app
started working all at once.
And that was really great.
Now we do have some areas
that we need to work on still.
The big one that I don't
have done is font support.
We have to update from the old
resource-based font manager to
the new Carbon font manager APIs.
That's yet to be done.
I haven't done a whole
lot with printing yet.
And you might think that for freehand
printing would be a big part.
But I know that coming down the line,
we've got this new print
stuff coming along.
So rather than rework what we have now,
I decided to just wait,
see what the new print
stuff is all about,
and do it that way.
Overall,
I think that the analogy that says that
carbonizing your application is roughly
equivalent to the PowerPC transition,
I really believe in that.
That is actually true,
and it's been my experience in
the three or four times that
I've done freehand on Carbon.
So why don't we go ahead and see
what freehand looks like running.
I see up here on the screen,
now I'm a little disappointed in this.
You'll notice that it's
showing the 32 by 32 bit icon.
I actually have a 128 by 128 icon.
I don't know why it's not showing up,
but we'll give it a shot.
So freehand launches, we hope.
All right.
Pay no attention to the
man behind the curtain.
We'll go ahead and go
through this dialogue.
Now I have to mention that
this is a technology demo.
It's not a product announcement.
Product marketing made me say that.
So here it is.
Freehand is running.
We'll go ahead and open the application.
Go to our documents, freehand sample art.
Bring up the lovely fairy picture
created by Delores Highsmith.
You'll notice that we
got a lot of the Aqua UI.
Most of our Aqua UI came about as
adopting the Appearance Manager.
We haven't done much beyond that.
Appearance Manager is really great.
I urge you to get a look at
that if you haven't done it yet.
Some of the great stuff that we get
running on 10 besides the Aqua UI,
the double buffering is really nice.
You'll notice as I move the panel around,
there's absolutely no redraw
of the picture underneath it.
If you're an artist and it takes you
a long time to redraw that picture,
if you have a really complex document,
this will be an incredible time saver.
Beyond that, we do have basic drawing,
those sorts of things working.
You'll notice that the drawing is
really smooth and lovely and stuff.
I added a minimal amount of
Carbon events into the tool tracking,
and that got me, you know,
it used to stutter a lot,
but now it doesn't.
It's really great.
So moving to Carbon was
actually quite easy,
and I hope that you all
get a chance to do it.
Okay?
Thanks, Scott.
Thanks a lot, Scott.
So you don't have to take my
word as an Apple employee.
What we find is the developers
who have moved over to Carbon have
been really happy with it.
And we're here for you to
help the process for all of
you be as easy as possible.
So what are the take-home points?
First of all, Carbon apps will get a
bunch of user benefits,
right?
We're going to make them more
responsive and more robust.
Carbon is the way to take your classic
app and get the Aqua interface.
You won't get it in classic,
but you will get it if
you move it to Aqua.
We really believe in
this and we live on it.
So the Finder is a Carbon application,
QuickTime Player, a bunch of other apps.
They're Carbon applications.
So our system is based on it
and we tune it every day because
we live on the whole thing.
And now is the time to carbonize.
There's a lot more info you can get.
On the website, there's a Carbon site.
There's a new tech pub site,
which is great.
It has this new inside Carbon,
which is inside Mac carbonized.
So if we can carbonize Doc,
you can carbonize apps.
And the last one is interesting here.
We actually have a list of
consulting companies who,
if you don't want to do it yourself,
you can just throw out some cash,
and they'll come and carbonize
your application for you.
So you can go ahead and check that out.
David Wright is the technology manager
to talk to if you have questions.
But the most important
thing here is tonight,
after you've partied with the
people you see here once a year,
and you're drunk,
and you get back to your hotel room
and you want to impress your boss,
pull out your PowerBook,
install DP4 on it,
and carbonize your application.
Thanks a lot.